in this video we are going to learn
about jenkins file in terms of theory we
will see what the Jenkins file is and
explore declarative and scripted
pipelines their main syntax as well as
their differences and advantages in the
practical part we will create and run
simple pipeline jobs using both
declarative and scripted pipelines let's
start by defining what a Jenkins file is
a Jenkins file is a script containing
the definition and the steps to execute
a Jenkins pipeline a Jenkins file is
typically stored on the source version
control at the root level of the
repository it is written using a
domain-specific language based on groovy
which is a scripting language for the
Java Virtual Machine a Jenkins file can
use the declarative or the scripted
syntax both support building continuous
delivery pipelines the best way to
introduce Jenkins files is to actually
show a simple one so let's dive into it
this is an example of a very simple
Jenkins file written with the scripted
syntax let's look at it line by line I
usually put the so-called XI Bank at the
beginning of my pipeline files to give
the location of groovy on my machine
this is optional but it is helpful for
syntax highlighting in your favorite
editor and on github a scripted pipeline
always starts with a node this allows to
allocate an executor and a workspace to
the pipeline within a node there are one
or more stages a stage is usually a task
to be performed we give a stage a name
here build so it can be visualized via
the stage view inside the stage you can
have all sorts of commands doing the
bulk of the task you want to execute
just to keep things simple here I'm
simply running an echo command to
display the string building you can have
as many stages as you want I usually
prefer to group them for example here
I'm using test and deploy
now let's have a look at the same script
written with the declarative syntax you
will first notice that the declarative
syntax is more verbose for such a small
Python script however it becomes more
readable once you have a more complex
and longer script a declarative pipeline
always starts with a pipeline directive
and contains an agent directive agent
instructs Jenkins to allocate an
executor and a workspace for the
pipeline to get started you can use any
agent so that Jenkins will allocate the
pipeline to any available executors on
the Jenkins master agents are also
useful if you want to run the pipeline
or a slave or agent Jenkins node another
required directive in the declarative
pipeline is the stages directive this
contains a sequence of one or more stage
directives we already saw the stage
directive in the scripted pipeline and
it works in the same way for the
declarative pipeline however unlike the
scripted pipeline the stage directive
requires a steps directive in order to
be a valid declarative pipeline a steps
directive instruction Keynes on the task
or command to execute here we have our
usual echo command to display a message
the same structure is repeated for the
stage test and deploy
now let's create simple pipeline jobs
using both the scripted and declarative
syntax go to Jenkins and create a new
job by clicking on new item give it a
name here I'm using my under school
first underscore pipeline
and select pipeline as job type then
click on OK as usual I give it a
friendly name by going to advanced
project options clicking on advanced and
typing a friendly name with spaces and
the display name in the pipeline section
we can choose between a pipeline script
and the pipeline script from s cm I told
you that it is best practice to use a
jenkins file to store it under version
control we will do this together in a
minute here I want to show you the
quickest way to try out a pipeline job I
select pipeline script and can start
typing my script in the box this is very
useful if you want to try a single step
very quickly
note that there are also some
pre-populated example to get you started
let's use the scripted pipeline I showed
you before there is no need to type it
because you can find it on github on the
companion repository for this video
course just go to the usual URL hands on
Jenkins in my github account and head to
section underscore for
code and scripted on the score pipeline
groovy
you can copy the script and paste it in
the script box finally click on save
let's build our first pipeline job by
clicking on build now
you can see that the pipeline is
visualized in real time via the stage
view this is why it is important to use
the stage directive and give it a
sensible label so that it is picked up
by the stage view inside each stage you
can expect the logs as well as the time
it took to execute each single stage you
can also inspect the full execution by
accessing the console output now let's
change the job configuration go to
pipeline
and use the option pipeline scraped from
SCM
we are going to use the Jenkins file
stored on the companion repository on
github and the section under school for
slash code
now I'd like you to post the video and
try it on your own first if you follow
the previous videos you should know how
to pull code from github pay attention
to the script path as you need to
configure this as well so now post the
video change the configuration and run
the job welcome back I hope you managed
to crack it if not no worries I'll show
you how to do it under SEM select get
under repository URL go to the root of
the companion github repository copy the
URL and paste it here
now let's configure the script path I
told you that it is a good practice to
store the Jenkins file at the root of
the repository I couldn't do it in my
repository because it is a documentation
repository with several pipeline jobs so
we need to navigate to the directory
where the Jenkins file is stored as you
can see on github the Jenkins file is
stored under section and the score for
slash code so we need to type the path
before Jenkins
finally click on save and build the job
the stage build view changes because we
are now checking out a declarative
pipeline but the final results are
similar
as usual you can inspect each stage
you can also access the stage view by
clicking on full stage view on the side
menu this is useful if you want to show
the pipeline on a screen for example on
an information radiator to give
visibility to the whole team when the
pipeline is running finally let's wrap
up with a comparison between scripted
and declarative part lines a scripted
pipeline follows the imperative
programming model and is particularly
suited for implementing complex
requirements this is because of its
flexibility and extensibility in fact
anything that can be scripted in groovy
can be executed in a scripted part line
scripted pipelines are well suited for
developers having experience with groovy
over another scripting language but
could become a bit messy if best
practices are not followed
conversely declarative pipelines
follow the declarative programming model
which focuses on what the pipeline
should accomplish without specifying in
detail how to perform it a declarative
pipeline is suited for regular
requirements due to its predefined and
opinionated syntax
this makes the clarity of pipelines more
readable and they can also be validated
thanks to a stricter and predefined
structure declarative pipelines can also
integrate snippets of scripted pipeline
if needed learning to write declarative
pipelines may require a bit of a
learning curve especially if you're not
familiar with the declarative
programming model to conclude both
scripted and declarative pipelines are
valid ways to write pipelines in jenkins
but they offer different advantages this
is the end of this video where we looked
at jenkins file and scripted and the
clarity of pipelines watch the next
video where we will have an overview of
the CD pipeline and an introduction to
docker